
# Recommendation System for ScholarLink

## Project Overview
This project is a web-based application that aims to match students with professors and fellow students and vice versa based on their research interests. It uses a recommendation engine to process and analyze research interests and suggests potential matches.

## Structure
- `app.py`: The main Flask application file that routes and serves the web interface.
- `config.ini`: Configuration file containing settings for the application.
- `Constants`: Folder containing `constants.py`, which defines the constant values used throughout the application.
- `DAO`: Folder containing `dataaccess.py` for accessing and managing data storage.
- `StudentData.xlsx`: Excel file containing the students' data.
- `ProfessorData.xlsx`: Excel file containing the professors' data.
- `Recommender.py`: Python script containing the logic for the recommendation engine.
- `requirements.txt`: A list of Python packages required to run the application.
- `static`: Folder containing static files like CSS.
  - `styles.css`: The stylesheet for the web application.
- `templates`: Folder containing HTML templates for Flask.
  - `error.html`: Error page template.
  - `index.html`: Main page template.
  - `recommendations.html`: Template for displaying recommendation results.
- `university_data.xlsx`: The original data shared.

## Setup

### Requirements
- Python 3.6+
- Pip
- Virtual environment (recommended)

### Installation
1. Download all the files to a local directory.
2. Navigate to the project directory and set up a virtual environment:
   ```sh
   python3 -m venv test
   source test/bin/activate  # On Unix/macOS
   test\Scripts\activate  # On Windows
   ```
3. Install the required dependencies:
   ```sh
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```

### Running the Application
1. To start the Flask application, run:
   ```sh
   python3 app.py
   ```
2. Open your web browser and go to `http://127.0.0.1:5000/` to access the application interface.

## Usage
- Upload student and professor data GUID's given in the Excel file to get started with recommendations.
- The system will provide a list of matched professors for students/professors and vice versa based on the research interests provided in the uploaded files.




## More on Recommender.py

The core of the recommender system is the `ResearchInterestRecommender` class, which starts by initializing the data access layer to retrieve pre-compiled lists of research interests for students and professors from a database or data store which organized and accessed through a Data Access Object (DAO) .

Upon initialization, the class first consolidates the research interests from both student and professor datasets into a single corpus. The consolidation is crucial because it ensures that the TF-IDF vectorization operates on the full spectrum of the academic interests present in the ecosystem, providing a more accurate feature space representation.

The TF-IDF (Term Frequency-Inverse Document Frequency) vectorization is then applied to this combined corpus. This technique quantifies the significance of terms relative to the document and corpus, effectively translating the textual data into a numerical space. This numerical representation is what enables the application of similarity measures.

Post-vectorization, cosine similarity is employed to measure the multidimensional vector angles generated by TF-IDF, which serves as a proxy for similarity in research interests. This is underpinned by the assumption that the cosine similarity between two term frequency vectors can represent the similarity in content between the documents they represent.

With the cosine similarity matrix computed, the recommendation functions can then extract indices of the top matches for a given entity—be it a student or a professor—by identifying the matrix entries with the highest similarity scores.

For the task of matching, the system uses the GUIDs—a unique identifier for each individual—as a reference point within the datasets to locate and rank the potential research interest alignments. It then generates recommendations, which are essentially a list of top-n matches based on the computed similarity scores.

The recommender provides functionality for cross-recommendations (students to professors and vice versa) and within-group recommendations (student-to-student and professor-to-professor), catering to the networking needs within the academic community.

In conclusion, the process used NLP techniques to convert qualitative text data into a quantitative form that can be systematically analyzed, providing an automated and scalable solution for research collaboration matchmaking within an academic setting.